As the American Civil War approached, Hindman was a passionate voice for secession and was primarily Arkansas's most prominent Fire-Eater. When Arkansas voted 65-5 to secede from the Union in May 1861, Hindman was present in the gallery of the convention.[55] With war approaching, Hindman resigned from Congress and recruited a regiment at Helena, which was mustered into Confederate service. He requested the state government for muskets, clothing and ten days of rations so that his men could "fight for our country."[56] By June 1, 1861, Hindman had raised ten companies which would eventually become known as the 2nd Arkansas Infantry, with six companies stationed at Helena and four at Pine Bluff. He lost five companies who refused to leave the state to fight. Afterwards, Hindman followed orders to report to Richmond, Virginia.[57] He began the long journey with his regiment in June. By September 1861, Hindman was promoted to the rank of brigadier general.[17] He and his regiment were soon active participants in the disastrous Kentucky Campaign, followed soon after that by fierce fighting at the Battle of Shiloh in April 1862, where he was slightly wounded.[17]

After his recovery, Hindman was promoted to the rank of Major General and was appointed commander of the Trans-Mississippi Department to prevent an invasion by the Union troops led by Samuel Curtis.[17][58] Events in Arkansas had taken a terrible turn for the worse. Most units had been stripped from the state for service east of the Mississippi River. When Hindman arrived in Little Rock, Arkansas, he found that his command was "bare of soldiers, penniless, defenseless, and dreadfully exposed" to the Federal Army that was approaching dangerously from the northwest.[59]

Hindman set to work and issued a series of harsh military edicts, instituting conscription, authorizing guerrilla warfare and requisitioning supplies for the defense of the State.[60] Hindman also commenced a campaign of misinformation designed to mislead Federal authorities about the strength of the state's defenses. He also diverted Texas troops bound for Virginia for use in defense of Arkansas.[61] This series of events, combined with harassing tactics, confused the Federal authorities, causing them to fear that they did not have an adequate supply line to conquer the state and soon diverted from a course towards the capital and instead moved to Helena to reestablish a solid supply line.[62]
In charge of "Hindman's Legion"
Portrait of Hindman by Aurelius O. Revenaugh, 1906.

Hindman's edicts, however, raised the ire of the local citizenry and them, and Hindman's political enemies demanded that the Confederate leaders in Richmond replace him. By August 1862, the authorities in Richmond decided to replace him with the well-meaning but incompetent Theophilus H. Holmes.[63] Hindman convinced Holmes to give him a field command in northern Arkansas, and he proceeded with a plan to drive out the invader.[64] Hindman aggressively moved into northwest Arkansas and managed to intercept the Federal army while it was divided into two parts. At this moment, however, Hindman's normally aggressive style gave way to uncharacteristic doubt. Rather than attack the divided pieces of the Federal army, Hindman entrenched himself at Prairie Grove, Arkansas, allowing the Federal forces to recombine and assault him.[65]

Hindman's position was well selected, but the better equipped and supplied Federal forces wore down the Confederate forces and Hindman was forced to withdraw back towards Little Rock, having missed his chance to destroy the Federal army. After the stalemate at Prairie Grove, Hindman was transferred back across the river and participated in the Battle of Chickamauga alongside his friend Pat Cleburne.[66] After being wounded in the neck at Chickamauga,[67] Hindman and his Legion continued to fight along with the Army of Tennessee against General William Tecumseh Sherman in the Atlanta Campaign, across North Georgia from the First Battle of Dalton to the Battle of Kennesaw Mountain, just outside Marietta, Georgia. On July 4, 1864, at Kennesaw Mountain, he was struck in the eye by a tree limb and fell off his horse. Hindman suffered severe injuries that left him unfit for service on the battlefield. He went to Atlanta and later Macon, Georgia to recuperate from his injuries.[68] Afterward, Hindman hoped that he would be able to fight after a full recovery. He applied for a transfer to the Trans-Mississippi Department. His request was denied by the Confederate War Department, but Jefferson Davis offered Hindman a leave of absence until he had fully recovered from his "physical disability."[69] After his leave of absence had been approved in August, Hindman set out for Texas. During their journey, Hindman's second daughter, Sallie, died of an illness near Meridian, Mississippi.[70] Hindman arrived in San Antonio and settled there with his family for the time being. He was honored by military officials and residents on January 26, 1865.[71] By May 1865, Confederate generals in New Orleans signed a document with Union generals detailing the Confederate terms of surrender.[72] Hindman refused to surrender and, along with many other ex-Confederates, he crossed the Rio Grande into Mexico and sought asylum.[73]
